logging support (#227)
swift-server/async-http-client: docs/logging-design.md

# Design of the way AsyncHTTPClient logs

<details>
  <summary>Unless you explicitly pass AsyncHTTPClient a `Logger` instance, nothing is ever logged.</summary>
  AsyncHTTPClient is useful in many places where you wouldn't want to log, for example a command line HTTP client. Also, we do not want to change its default behaviour in a minor release.
</details>
<details>
  <summary>Nothing is logged at level `info` or higher, unless something is really wrong that cannot be communicated through the API.</summary>
  Fundamentally, AsyncHTTPClient performs a simple task, it makes a HTTP request and communicates the outcome back via its API. In normal usage, we would not expect people to want AsyncHTTPClient to log. In certain scenarios, for example when debugging why a request takes longer than expected it may however be useful to get information about AsyncHTTPClient's connection pool. That is when enabling logging may become useful.
</details>
<details>

>   <summary>Each request will get a globally unique request ID (`ahc-request-id`) that will be attached (as metadata) to each log message relevant to a request.</summary>

Reviewer: Shouldn't we offload the burden of setting unique `ahc-request-id`'s to a client? We already accept a logger for every method, for the client it'll be extremely simple to set a unique uuid in it. UUID creation is not free (and when passed in metadata it's actually materialised unless some custom code is written), I think we'll be fine with just giving client a way to set a unique uuid per http request.

Reviewer 2: Such "at beginning inject some metadata to context (logger metadata)" is what the baggage context infrastructure is being designed for. 

Specifically "if no trace header detected, make a new span id and store it" is the most common implementation of a tracer performing an "extract (from headers to context). So that's something a tracer / baggage context "instrument" (we don't have settled names for those yet) would be doing...

If you want to do something ad hoc for now that's also ok I guess, but let's keep an eye out for the overlap here and how the context infra would be used to achieve the same (and more, trace header extraction) in the future.

Reviewer 3: this is a really good point - we should design this feature with an eye towards the distributed tracing work we kicked off in GSoC. to be clear, we should be careful to hold back progress here, but we should design this in a way  that can be evolved into full distributed tracing

Reviewer 2: I think we might be okey with doing "whatever is easiest" here for the time being and once the baggage baggage context matures I'm expecting it'd be medium effort to plug the right things anyway, and likely not "just" change one generator for another. 

So let's just keep in mind that this part is very likely to change, and let's do so when the other lib is ready.

// cc @slashmo

Reviewer: I may be missing something, but why do we ever want to generate ids inside the library?
It can be achieved with a wrapper (since it can take `Logger`, inject some variables and pass it to a delegate). So does the tracing or whatever keys we want to pass inside. Basically, we can provide a wrapper that solves the problem and shelve this work until we know how tracing API will look like.

Author: @avolokhov / @ktoso / @tomerd The reason I went ahead adding a `ahc-request-id` (which is just an atomically incrementing `Int`) is that without it, correlating the log messages is impossible. Sure, the user _can_ add an ID but if without adding one in AHC, they _have to_ do it to make sense of the log messages. I thought that's too much and therefore I thought it may be useful to just have an ID for AHC.

  When many concurrent requests are active, it can be challenging to figure out which log message is associated with which request. To facilitate this task, AsyncHTTPClient will add a metadata field `ahc-request-id` to each log message so you can first find the request ID that is causing issues and then filter only messages with that ID.
</details>
<details>
  <summary>Your `Logger` metadata is preserved.</summary>
  AsyncHTTPClient accepts a `Logger` on every request method. This means that all the metadata you have attached, will be present on log messages issued by AsyncHTTPClient.

>  For example, if you attach `["my-system-req-uuid": "84B453E0-0DFD-4B4B-BF22-3434812C9015"]` and then do two requests using AsyncHTTPClient, both of those requests will carry `"my-system-req-uuid` as well as AsyncHTTPClient's `ahc-request-id`. This allows you to filter all HTTP request made from one of your system's requests whilst still disambiguating the HTTP requests (they will have different `ahc-request-id`s.

Reviewer 2: You may want to be specific how "merge" works, or leave it up to our context work to define it (also fine) if a key is overlapping, would both be stored, would the "latter" one win etc.

Author: @ktoso Not sure I fully understand. Right now, we don't do any merging in AHC. We just add some `ahc-*` keys.

Is what you're referring to the following situation:

```swift
// user code (outside AHC)
var logger = ...
logger[metadataKey: "connection"] = "a very good connection"

// in AHC
logger.debug("established connection", metadata: ["connection": "\(ahcConnection)"])
```

? If yes, then it's up to the `LogHandler` (the logging backend) to merge the on-Logger metadata with the ad-hoc metadata from a message.

Reviewer 2: Hey right that's what I had in mind, though you're right that it's not AHC that has to care about it 👍 Ignore that comment here, it concerns log handler and tracers :)

</details>
<details>
  <summary>Instead of accepting one `Logger` instance per `HTTPClient` instance, each request method can accept a `Logger`.</summary>
  This allows AsyncHTTPClient to preserve your metadata and add its own metadata such as `ahc-request-id`.
</details>
<details>

>   <summary>Only static log messages are used.</summary>

Reviewer 2: Let's call it what it is perhaps -- structured logging :-) WDYT about the below (so people can learn about the topic in general by learning about in general from various materials, rather than our swift specific static/not static terminology).

```suggestion
  <summary>All logs use the structured logging pattern, i.e. only use static log messages and accompanying key/value metadata.</summary>
```

Reviewer 2: (+1 on the general guideline)

Author: @ktoso Thank you! Do you have a good link where structured logging is defined as:

- only static messages
- everything else in metadata

? Would be good to link to it here if we call it out.

(I took your change regardless)

Reviewer 2: weirdly enough the best description I found is on the sumo logic devops glossary:

- https://www.sumologic.com/glossary/structured-logging/

> Structured logging is the practice of implementing a consistent, predetermined message format for application logs that allows them to be treated as data sets rather than text. The idea of structured logging is to take an application log that is delivered as a string of text and convert it into a simple relational data set that can be more easily searched and analyzed.

there's plenty support for the technique in most java backends, log4j2 (the most popular very good one) and niche ones; there's a good reference list here: https://tersesystems.com/#references weirdly enough they all kind of fail to write a well defined "one sentence" about it, it's become kind of known that it's "key value pairs rather than pain text" I guess.

Author: thanks @ktoso will link one of those!

Author: done

  None of the log messages issued by AsyncHTTPClient will use String interpolation which means they will always be the exact same message.

  For example when AsyncHTTPClient wants to tell you it got an actual network connection to perform a request on, it will give the logger the following pieces of information:

  - message: `got connection for request`
  - metadata (the values are example):
    - `ahc-request-id`: `0`
    - `ahc-connection`: `SocketChannel { BaseSocket { fd=15 }, active = true, localAddress = Optional([IPv4]127.0.0.1/127.0.0.1:54459), remoteAddress = Optional([IPv4]127.0.0.1/127.0.0.1:54457) }`

  As you can see above, the log message doesn't actually contain the request or the network connection. Both of those pieces of information are in the `metadata`.

>   The rationale is that many people use log aggregation systems where it may be very useful to aggregate by log message which is much simplified by using a constant string instead of one with the information (such as the connection) in the middle of the log message.

Reviewer: It may also worth mentioning log filtering, from comments above it looks like more common use case.

>   The rationale is that many people use log aggregation systems where it may be very useful to aggregate by log message which is much simplified by using a constant string instead of one with the information (such as the connection) in the middle of the log message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The rationale is that many people use log aggregation systems where it is very useful to aggregate, search and group by log message specific metadata values which is greatly simplified by using a constant string (relatively stable) string, and explicitly marked metadata values which make it easy to filter by.
```

^ Focused a bit more on the search cases, WDYT

Author: thank you! took this change

</details>
<details>
  <summary>`debug` should be enough to diagnose most problems but information that can be correlated is usually skipped.</summary>
  When crafting log messages, it's often hard to strike a balance between logging everything and logging just enough.

>   The problem with logging everything is that logging itself becomes very slow. We want logging in `debug` level to still be reasonably performant and therefore avoid logging information that can be correlated from other log messages.

Reviewer 2: A good "rule of thumb" I found is "assume someone may be running with debug logging ON in production" so it can't be _too much_. Yet _trace_ can be everything you would need to know when debugging nasty issues in the implementation.

Author: Agreed. Do you think I need to add more info? Like your rule of thumb?

Reviewer 2: Maybe the rule of thumb formulated like that is easy to understand? Your call if you'd like to include it 👍

Author: thanks, added

  For example, AsyncHTTPClient may tell you in two log messages that it `got a connection` (from the connection pool) and a little later that it's `parking connection` (in the connection pool). Just like all messages, both of them will have an associated `ahc-request-id` which makes it possible to correlate the two log messages. The message that logs that we actually got a network connection will also include information about this network connection. The message that we're now parking the connection however _will not_. The information which connection is being parked can be found by filtering all other log messages with the same `ahc-request-id`.
</details>
<details>

>   <summary>In `trace`, AsyncHTTPClient may log _a lot_.</summary>

Reviewer 2: 👍 Good

  In the `.trace` log level, AsyncHTTPClient basically logs all the information that it has handily available. The frugality considerations we take in `.debug` do not apply here. We just want to log as much information as possible. This is useful almost exclusively for local debugging and should almost certainly not be sent into a log aggregation system where the information might be persisted for a long time. This also means, handing AsyncHTTPClient a logger in `logLevel = .trace` may have a fairly serious performance impact.

> </details>

Reviewer 3: in the past I ran into situations where http clients and proxies had to include log redacting logic to avoid logging potentially sensitive information. usually some heuristics around headers. this is always nasty to need and do, so something to think about when we decide what information to include when we log

Author: @tomerd Very good point! What do you propose? Including in the labels if they may contain private info or not? Or having a per-`HTTPClient` switch to switch on/off logging of private info?
